He was there when they were fighting in Japan.
Well, he was there.
And since he was the older boy, he was the one who
made me feel at home. And he was the one who
accompanied me in everything. Naturally, I felt
very sad. But when he came to
see me, he told me, Mom, I came for the last time.
this week, but I'm going to go to San Francisco,
California, he said. I'm going to be there, it
seems to me that one day or two, and I'm going to go to
the other
side, they're going to take me. So, when he was in
San Francisco, he tells me, Amma, me mandó una
carta por avión y me dice, Amma, ya me voy. Dice,
quiero que me mandes diez pesos. Dice, porque ya me
voy a ir. Yo no sé cuándo voy a venir, entonces
estaba la guerra. Bueno, yo siempre he tenido
valor. Le digo, Well, my son, but God is very great
and soon you will return. I felt sad because I
didn't always feel good. I still would have felt
good with my husband, I was fine. But he was my
husband and he was my son. Well, he
left, he stayed, he continued. Le mandé el dinero
pronto porque todo el tiempo el dinero en mí había
muy poco, pero fui una mamá que cuidé mucho, mucho
cuidé. Entonces, no lo recibió, pero lo recibió
allá cuando estaba allá. Entonces, a la semana me
habla él y me dice, mamá, aquí, Ya recibí tu carta y
estoy bien. Y mira, aquí estoy con una japonesa
retratado. Ya me siento más contento porque aquí
son muy amables. Rogándole a Dios que terminara la
guerra porque estaba duro. Pues no, Diosito, en
todo obra que mis hijos que han ido. Entonces, mi
hijo yo creo que iba en el barco, o iba llegando, o
estaba allá, cuando dice que todos por donde
quiera brincaban, gritaban, se abrazaban,
aventaban cojines, aventaban cuento, y gracias a
Dios que se terminó la guerra. Sí, fíjate. Dice mi
hijo, mamá, We were happy, it was very sad, but at
the same time, happy because the war is over. It
lasted a year, raising, helping all the
destructors that the war caused. And as he looked,
as I told you about the chubasco here, Asina says,
my boy, that he looked, stepping, The blood. Well,
how much, he said they looked. So my boy didn't have
much school. Poorly, but he always gave my
children school. Because they loved them. This
boy only studied until five. But this boy had a very
good memory. Este muchacho yo le alistaba su
lonche, él tenía 17 años, 16 años.
Le alistaba su lonche y se iba.
Y yo hago, digo, muchachos, a los más chicos, no hay
de estos muchachos en la escuela, dice él. Mom, we
saw him yesterday, he didn't go to school. He got
scared of the bus. There were no phones, there was
nothing. So, for us, there was nothing. Well, I
said... This boy, what's his name? Graviel.
Graviel. German. German. Yes, he's the oldest.
He's the oldest. Yes. Well, then...
He says, my mom, here I need the school he gave me.
Because this boy learned very well to write
Spanish and to read it in the short time he was in
school. He learned very well to read English and to
read it, write it. Thank you
very much. Yeah, okay. You're not going to stop by
the office later? Oh, yeah, I'll run by. Okay. I
don't know exactly who it will be. Okay. Thank you.
Hello, how are you? Hello. That's my girl. Nice to
meet you. That's the one I have here. That's the one
I have here in the house, that's the only one. Is it
the smallest? Okay. The youngest? Yes, yes. Huh?
So he says, Mom, I was lucky. And that's why now I
think the school you gave me is useful. And tell my
brothers to never leave school, because school is
what you need. But look, he says, here I am in an
office. He says, I'm receiving everything from
Texas. Here, he says, I am the one who is receiving
everything that comes from there. And I am with the
pencil. He says, here... I remember what you told
me. You said that all the time you tried to send us to
school. And we didn't go to school. I didn't go to
school. Well, now I need to go. But mom, here I am.
God gave me a head. And you know what I studied at
school. And now I'm here in the office. He only went
to those places by turn. But he was there all the
time, receiving the goods that came from here,
from the States, there. You see? So, when he came,
he came, but also my whole family.
They were good boys. I say that my children were
good because I didn't fight like Nora does. Moms
fight with their youth. My son got addicted when he
went to work. It's good that the one who wants to be
bad, the one who wants to go, and wants to get
addicted, gets it, and the one who doesn't,
doesn't. But he, He took the vice there and came to
Sina, Sina, Sina, and he was very drunk, very
drunk. Well, then, when he came,
he told me, Mom, I think you're going to buy me a
truck to work. He said, because I don't want to work
in the field. I said, well, no. I said, yes, I'm
going to raise money for you to buy a truck, because
I know that trucks give money. And we're going to do
our best to buy you a truck. Well, then my friends
tell me, Oye, Lupe, ¿tú tienes un muchacho en el
servicio? Le digo sí. Y va a venir en estos días. I
told him, but I don't know, I told him, how will it
come, I told him. Because when you have your
children in the house, if there is a son or if there
is a daughter, you know the customs they have with
you. And outside of you, you don't know what
customs they bring. I told him, I don't know, I told
him, what customs will be the ones he brings, or
not, I told him. Well, he came. He was very well for a
month. Very happy, very tired. Tired, and he was
resting at home. And he said, Mom starts to wash.
Because he... Every little bit, he wanted to be in
the bathroom, changing clothes and everything.
And he said, Mom, I'll help you lift up your whole
house. And I said, well, that's good. And you start
washing? Yes, so that you wash and I start lifting
up your whole house. And he would get up and lift up
the whole house. And it was very clean. He would
start listening to his music. Well, then, every
month he would leave. Every month. at about four in
the morning, he would come to drink. Because the
sign of each person comes from a very young age.
When he was young, very young, he would think a lot
about shaking hands and jumping and screaming.
And I would always remember that. When he arrived,
Yo estaba despierta porque él no parecía. Y yo
pensé, dije yo, ay, a lo mejor este muchacho trae el
vicio de tomar. Y como venía así, dije, pues quién
sabe. Yo estaba mortificada y yo no estaba
durmiendo. Él llega como ese del corredor y se
agarra. Uh, tiró un grito bien fuerte. Ay, dije yo.
Well, this one is good to drink. And since it was the
time of Piscas, there were a lot of people there,
and well, there were my friends who had asked me. So
they woke up later. Then they said, ah, it's the
soldier. Well, Lupe told me. So I went out and I
talked to him. And he said to me, oh mom, well, he
dispenses me. So he goes inside and I lay him down.
And he's thinking,
he's thinking over there. Everything that was
happening over there, he was having it as a
recorder. to everything, to what he drank, to
everything. He was delirious about all of that. At
last he fell asleep.
He passed by, I bought him the truck. And that week,
a month later, they wanted a man to work in the field
with those skulls, so they were tractors. And he
was also forced to do that job. So he says, I'm going
to work, mom, this week, because they need a man.
And he came in to work. Oh, he was very happy
working. Well, then, when there are again,
whether boys or girls, when there is again a
person, well, those others are happy and
everything. And then, well, there were girls
there as well, in the field and everything. And
since he was a soldier, well, the girls were very
happy to look at him and to greet him and all that. A
little while later, a girl cheated on him. That
year, he got married. I bought him a truck. He went
to Falfurrias, because they sell a lot of
watermelon there. He went with the truck to the
watermelon. No, he made a lot of money in the first
few weeks. The boy who followed him, his name was El
Héroe Urbano. He was the one who followed him. He
left school and went to Falfurrias, to La Sandía.
He was the little boy who carried the sand, and he
was the one with the truck. Well, I have a little
place. And then I told him, I'm going to make a house
with that money you make with the truck. I make a
house, always thinking. Well, nothing. You know,
when it's not the truck, this happens to the truck,
you have to pay, and then with vice, everything is
lost. No, he got married. He got married and he
would have been very sad to leave me. And I told him,
son, look, when you left, you left me. He said, yes,
mom, I did leave you, but it was not because of my
will. He said, it was because they took me. And now
it's not my will. I want to be here with you. He says,
I don't want to leave. Well. After we got married,
he stayed there for a year. He and his wife, we all
went to the police station, to work, and he took the
truck. And because I was encouraging them, I was
going to work like them. I was going to work like my
family, me and all my children, as always. So we
went to the year, and he was with me,
and they already had a daughter, who is the eldest
of them. Her name is Hilda, German for her father.
She is his first daughter. He said, I told him, the
other boy who was following, and the one who was
following him, he stayed because he couldn't
follow me because he wanted to finish his school.
And he stayed in his house alone. He had chickens,
he had pigs, and he stayed to take care of them. And I
went to do something for my family. So, the boy who
was being followed, the second one, he didn't have
a diarrhea license, but he he took the truck as he
wanted, and a friend of mine and his wife, they were
very close friends, and they said that they were
going with us, and he had the license to carry that
friend, and he said, I'm going with you, and I'll
carry your truck, and I'll help him, he said. Well,
I said, well, then we'll go. And we went, and it
wasn't long before that truck He hit my boy. When he
entered Robes Town, there were about two of us in
the ranch where we lived. And my boy had to go in like
this and the right way. Then another one came and
hit him from under the truck. He came and my boy
stopped here. This one didn't stop and he came and
hit him from under the truck. And my two youngest
boys were going. The work of God was that the truck
was heavy and it was jammed because it was where it
was going to go around. He was waiting. So he beat
him. He beat him a little. We went to Sina. We left
and with that family, well, then we were in
Glumento. There I had some good patrons. By the
way, my little baby boy, they loved him very much.
And they took a mube from us, where my little boy,
the rib that was put here, was left here. And they
loved the bosses very much. And that's where we
were. Then we made him cotton and we carried him and
everything. With the truck, my medium boy carried
the cotton. Well, we didn't want this truck
anymore because it was sold out. So there was a
truck there, Chivet.
And I was with my brother, he was also a trucker.
So we had already made money, and those bosses were
owners of that agency. So my brother told them, he
said, we can't give you anything for the truck, but
we can give you a part of the money and you can take
the truck for your sister. So a boy said, it was
good. And I told him, but we're not going to leave
here, we're not going to leave here. I told him, I
don't want to live without money. So he says, well,
no, he says, with that we have to get there. We took
out the truck, and we left the truck there, but the
truck had already given us money. And I, with all my
family, there were eight, there were seven. And
the other brother tells me, are you going to leave?
I said, yes. And why are you going to leave if there
are more people who eat than who work? I said, yes,
but here I have another worker, who is the truck. I
told him, my boy, and me. Well, mom is already
tired. She's going to drink water and then drink
something. I'm tired of what? Well, to be sitting.
So we arrived and we took out the truck and we fixed
it. And so we went to Oklahoma. We arrived in
Oklahoma. This little girl who told you, the lady,
she was about 12 years old. They were all
schoolboys. But when there were opportunities,
they would go to school even if they didn't help me.
So we went, we left there a little house that they
gave us everything and they said that we were going
to the border guard because everything was closed
here and that we were going to the border guard
because we were going to meet there and bring food.
So I didn't want to go very well because it was the
border guard. And he tells me, the other gentleman
had his papers and we all had our papers, but he had
his license. I said, he doesn't say anything about
going to the other side. He says, no, he doesn't say
anything. He says, we can go. Well, let's go. So we
went. Everything was very unknown. On the other
side it was very unknown. It was in the guardrail.
And I... We went in and there was a little shop with a
lot of air and a lot of heat. And then they started
saying, where are you from? We asked them where
they were from. They said they had just arrived. I
said, yes, we have just arrived. He said, don't you
know what time it is? I said, yes, I can hear you. I
said, what time? He said, well, if they bring boys
from school, they won't even go to work. And they
won't even give them a job, because right now it's
very hard here for the boys from school and
everything. Well, I started to get nervous all of a
sudden. So we looked for the orders and
everything. So I said, I, as I receive the
surprise, I solve it later. So I told them, yes, I
told them, but since there is a school, I put my boys
in the school. I told them, I don't take care of
them. Ah, well, then we came. No, there we were, and
it was very cold already in those times, very cold,
a lot of air, a lot of rain, a lot of ice. So I took...
to my little boy, who is the oldest, the youngest of
all the oldest, of the four oldest. Well, then, The
truck was carrying the cotton, and they were just
trying to pinch it. We had a few pinchers, and they
were trying to pinch it, and I didn't need them to
help me, not even with the cold and all that. Then
the boss said, no, you know what, you can send them
to school. The boss said, you can send them to
school and you can work. No, I don't have much. He
said, but it will only be a month, what there will
be, just a month. I said, well, with that month I had
100 pesos. I said, well, another month is good. We
went to work another day. No. Well, I always
struggled because the cold, sometimes people
couldn't step on it, but I would throw myself to
walk, sometimes holding the cold, because
sometimes it was cold, I could fall. And well,
everyone, and the oldest boy of mine said, mom,
it's very cold. I said, yes, it's very cold, go. If
you have a lot of cold, go to the truck, while the
cold calms down, and make a fire. And people made a
fire there. And they were, I with the exercise and
everything, because I think that rather with the
mortifications, there are times when you don't
feel anything. I, I said, I don't feel the cold, and
I hurried a lot, a lot, because they were just
grabbing like that, everything like that, even. I
would go out and when he came back, I would weigh
myself and I would get rid of the cold. Yes, I would
weigh myself two or three times. My brother or
others would say, hey, let's go. But it was already
three o'clock. Let's go, let's go. And we would go.
When we got there, our clothes were like that and we
would leave them in the bucket. We were right, we
were right, we were cold. Look, look how it's
getting cold. Oh, well, then... Well, I had that
commitment to that truck until I got home. We
brought both trucks, because they didn't want the
other one. So, that year, I left. So, my boy still
didn't leave me. He told me that He said, I had
cousins in Washington. Washington State.
Washington State. So they would tell me to leave
all the time. And this boy, who had an accident,
told me, Mom, let's go. Let's go to where my cousins
are. I said, no, I don't want to go with you. And I
said, no, it's better to be here, fighting. Well,
that year, my boy told me, I told him, the strongest
ice came here. Very strong ice. All the ice broke.
So he said to me, I said, you know what? He said, now I
can go to Washington, mom. I said, yes, now I'm
going to go. He said, well, mom, I felt very
mortified because my son did go to the service. He
finished his school. He had one month, I think, or
three months left for him to finish his school. The
teachers went and everything, raising
signatures, he with the boss, the boss of us, and
they left him so that the government would leave
him so that he could finish his school in three
months. So, already in that year, which I think I
think it was the El cincuenta y cinco, o el cuarenta
y cuatro, no, cuarenta y seis, yo creo. Entonces me
dice, mamá, yo ya me voy a ir. Dice, ahora sí, ¿qué va
a hacer usted? Porque yo voy a vender a usted
marranos, vender gallinas, porque él era el que me
los cuidaba. Él era... woman and man, and it was
dad. So I told him, well, go sell everything. And
they were in a hurry, carrying chickens, pigs,
everything to sell. They sold everything. He was
about to leave the service. He said, what about
you? I said, I'm going to Washington because I'm
bringing the truck's commitment. And three days
later, the cold ended everything in Los Files. I
told him, I'm going to have to leave. And I thought
that my son was going to be close to me. And I was
thinking that he was going to be close. And I was
going to go there because I was close. So he just
left. Arreglamos todos nosotros. Yo tenía un
muchacho que se vino para California, el más chico
de los grandes. Entonces, ese día recibí una carta
de él. Entonces le dije a mi muchacho, vámonos.
Escribe luego, luego una carta y mándasela y dile
que en Washington nos vemos.
Nos fuimos, luego lo arreglamos todo. We went out
to Washington. I had my youngest baby, the
youngest of the family, of the men. So, because the
baby sometimes followed her. So, they went very
often.
Well, we arrived in Washington. There, I worked
day after day for three months. With that
asparagus, you cut it like this. For three months,
you have to work. For four in the morning, you have
to go to work. Because that one is cut very early.
With a stick. It's a carton like cabbage, but you
put it in drawers. Here is the line of drawers,
another line of drawers, and here you cut it and you
put it in, and they pay for it in pounds. And there
were times that what we cut, we would get up to 30
pesos per day, each person. 30, me, 30, my boy,
because only the two of us worked. Because
everyone went to school, the middle school kids,
yes, everyone to school. Well, then, this year, I
came, I came back. Entonces yo salvé mi troque, yo
gané muy buen dinero, y entonces mi muchacho
todavía andaba conmigo, pero ya entonces ya
estaba casado, ya tenía dos años de casado, pero él
ya estaba aparte. Pero siempre nosotros lo
llevamos. Al año nomás acabamos todo el trabajo de
Washington. Nos vinimos al West, y ahí estuvimos
trabajando. Luego de ahí, nos vinimos aquí a
este...
Bicho, ¿cómo se llama? Sí. No, no en Bicho, no. Este
pueblito que está aquí de Robistown. No, no,
Viver, no. ¿Cómo se llama este pueblito chiquito?
Ahí está de aquel lado de Robestán, ahorita no
recuerdo. Bueno, ahí estuvimos. Mi muchacho
vino. the one who was in the army, I wasn't here, I
was in Washington, and he came here, but he had
already left his girlfriend here. He was going to
get married. When he left the service, at the age of
two, he got married. Well, when I came that year, my
boyfriend, I was here, and at the age of two, he was
here. So, Él, como ella tenía su novia, ese año yo no
estaba aquí, pero lo recibieron los papás de esa
muchacha.
Y dicen sus papás es mucho lo que hicieron a mi
muchacho.
Y entonces a los dos años él se casó con su muchacho.
Bueno, le tocó muy buena suerte él.
Yo a los dos años yo compré entonces ya esa troca,
los muchachos sacaron otra troca del año que fue el
muchacho que tengo ahorita en California. Este
muchacho Yo quedé mala. Cuando yo vine el segundo
año, yo quedé mala y me dijo el doctor, ¿para qué te
vas? Si tú vas a estar mala. Y si tú te atrasas en el
camino, tú te van a poner que tener en un hospital.
Dice, o regresar para atrás. Dice, y tú no
necesitas irte. And I was very mortified because I
was the one who was directing my boy. I was the one
responsible for everything. Because I couldn't
trust him because he was a boy. I said, but at the
same time I can't leave either. So I stayed and my
boy tells me, this one who is the second one. But
with permission, you are a nurse. And he said, you
can,
you can, brother, you can go wherever you want.
Ah, my boy says, stay. He says, I'll take you, mom.
He says, because you're bad. He says, and if you get
better, I'll take you. Let him go there alone. He
says, oh, I'm mortifying myself. I said, because I
don't want to stay. I said, because I don't want to
lose anything. But there are times that one... I
never trusted my children to run my business. No,
they were already big, but they counted on me.
Because I never wanted my children to put me out. I
said, if I get careless, my children take
everything out and put me out. I said, no,
everything they want to do, I want to know. Well, I
don't know about that. Okay, I'm going to stay. And
you're going to do this and this, and you're going
to do it. No. Well. And I just based myself on the
fact that my boy was going to to do what we, my second
son, explained to him what he was going to do and
what responsibility he was going to take. And so
did I, but he didn't do it. He did it on one side, he
believed in his friends, and he did it on the other
side. There was another boy in Washington,
married, but he was the youngest of all. So, Yo le
dije a mi hermano, yo, que es este hermano que tengo
aquí, que es el mayor mío, le dije yo, me voy contigo
pa'l juez. Y yo tenía estos muchachitos, todos
medianos, pero la muchachita más grande esa tenía
como 12 años. I said, I'm going to go with you. He
said, and why are you going to go? He said, if very
few are the ones who pinch and you with so many
children. I said, well, as I want I have to do
something. I said, because here I can't do
anything alone here. I said, and it's better to go
with you. I start pinching and I know how I'm going
to work. Well, these little boys, my baby, I think
he was about two months old, he was a baby. And this
other one, a little girl. Well, I went with my
brother. My brother had a pickup truck, he had a big
truck. He carried people. And a sister-in-law of
mine had given me a baby bed with all the fabric,
pure fabric. Well, what I thought was that then we
were going to go fishing, and we would throw that
child into the truck, and there I would put my baby,
and the biggest one, or the one that would fly like
that, there they would put the bed in the shade and
every time they went out I would take care of them or
the one who would go out would take care of them or my
little girl, who is the oldest, would look after
them and since they were very good, just being
clean and everything they didn't bother, they
would play, they would eat and everything. Well,
because then, look, I Me apuraba mucho y mis niños
eran muy buenos pa' trabajar. Miraban aquellas
matas de algodón, mira, de este tamaño, tan
grandes, llenas, mira, de algodón. En veces me
decía mi hermano, ¿quieres ir pa' Glumento al show
o algo? No. ¿Te vas a quedar? Dice así. Me quedaba
con los dos niños, que ellos no querían ir o no los
mandaba. Y si iban mis otros dos muchachitos,
porque pues ellos se cansaban al fin, no querían
ir. Ellos iban con ellos. Y yo me quedaba. ¿Qué
crees que hacía todo ese día? Yo piscaba todo el
día, piscaba. Llenaba los costales todos de
algodón. Y como estaba cerquita de la casa,
llenaba aquellos costales llenos de algodón, lo
que yo podía. Pagaban a dos cincuenta, me parece,
la cien allá. Huaxina nomás, con todo y castillo.
¿Tú entiendes todo lo que te estoy diciendo? Sí,
chico, bueno. Entonces,
cuando mis muchachitos no iban, que era la
muchachita grande, y una hija que tengo en
Filadelfia, tengo una hija, y este... Rudy, who is
the husband of this one who was here, Virginia.
Yes. Well, that's my son. Yes. He also stayed. And
yes, the three of us were going, all the others, but
the three who helped me were them. They loved life
and work and work just like me. ¿Qué crees que otro
día aquí iba mi hermano a pesar algodón? Pesaban
los 500, 400
libras de algodón. Todo eso piscaron ustedes, sí.
Porque a mis muchachitos siempre les gustó
trabajar igual a mí, porque yo, Like my father, my
father taught me how to work and how to do a clean job
in the field. That's how I taught myself, because
it was all that my father left me. And your husband
too? No. No? I struggled. Doesn't your husband
like to work? No, my life is a story. Yes, it is. My
life is very... Well, tell me about your husband.
Bueno, ahorita, amiga. Entonces, mi...
Todo eso, decía mi hermano, todo eso hiciste tú.
Sí. Oye, no creo yo, le digo, pues todo el día
trabajamos. Fíjate nomás. Cuando yo me quedaba,
yo llegué a hacer hasta 500 libras en un día de
piscar algodón. A lot of cotton. Every day 300, 400
pounds of cotton. I did it every day. I did it alone.
You did it alone? I did it alone. Why don't you bring
her a soda
and something? Yes. So... You're going to... It
was a lot of what we would step on. They would say, I
would empty it. There in that ranch of José Yáliva,
I would step on a lot of cotton. And I would beat my
little brother, older than me, because he was very
thin and all, to carry the pounds. My little
brother couldn't. And I would lift them up and say
to my father, I'm going to put the gold teeth on
Lupe. Porque Lupe, buena trabajadora que es,
decía él. Bueno, por eso es de que yo I got married
and continued working very hard, both at home and
in the field, because that's how I forced myself to
work a lot at home, since I was very little. I worked
and worked, and I continued working, and until
now, it's rarely the day that I get tired. It's
rarely the day that I go to bed early because I'm
tired, because something hurts. So I
went
to... I worked a lot that year, I think it was in
1955.
So I say to my boy, who is in Washington, come for me.
Because I want to go back. Because this boy didn't
go back. The one who saw him took the truck. He
stayed there.
He stayed there. So, do you bring me coffee, Jane?
Yes. So he said to me, Mamá, ¿sabe qué? Dijo, que el
troqui aquí está en Idaho. Dijo, y este muchacho se
llama Avaristo, el que está en California.
Entonces, dice, él se fue, mamá, y aquí dejó el
troqui. Le dije, ¿sabes qué? Quiero que agarres el
troqui y te vengas pronto por mí, le dije. Vente.